Brief
1 Workshop Overview
1.1 Course Agenda
Keywords— #hacking #tracking #tracing #scraping #sensing #AI #synthetic #Iot #architecture #augmentation
#compression #surveillance #scripting #algorithms
In technology, architecture, or electronics, the ”master/slave” protocol is used to describe an asymmetric
relationship between primary and secondary devices or components of a system. This relationship is most
often, dependent on the amount of control or computation embedded in a system. In a linked configuration,
whenever a device has significantly more compute or control than its counterparts, it is considered to be the
’Master’, and if the roles are reversed, we call it a ’Slave’. A clear reference to this relationship used to be
prominent within the AI-human discourse, but in recent years, this border has become more vague, cryptic,
and obscure. We are learning that machines can work better and faster, not when we subject them to our
modus operandi, but when we let them follow a different, nonhuman, black box protocol. We increasingly find
it easier to let computers solve problems in their own way - even when we do not understand what they do or
how they do it.
This workshop explores the intricacies of the physical manifestation of this protocol, exploring the changing
dynamics of control within architecture and technology. Let’s switch roles, let go of control, embrace the
unknown, and speculate the simulacrum!
1.2 Objectives
• Fostering a deeper understanding of nonhuman protocols to solve very human problems.
• Critical data filtering, visualization, and communication.
• Mapping and visualizing the hidden layers of the site, and producing a critical response.
1.3 Methodology / Research Direction
Students will exercise this exploration in the built environment in and around the university, taking sites from
different scales and using them as subjects for our projects.
The project will unfold in 2 phases.
• phase 1 (slave): Collecting-Sorting-Generating
Collecting, scraping, capturing, and generating (synthetic) data from the site. This is primarily accomplished
through sensor data from encased microcontrollers. The result visualizes hidden layers of information,
such as temperature, humidity, gasses, sound, WiFi, Bluetooth, population, and trajectories,
all as volumetric 3D heat maps. Additionally, scraping tools, photogrammetry techniques, 360 videos,
drone footage, metadata-mapped images, and synthetic data can also be deployed. .
• phase 2 (master): Speculating-Augmenting-Making
The ’homegrown’ synthetic dataset will be used in a multi-dimensional machine learning model, speculating
and hallucinating architectural elements that critically act in response to corresponding inputs.
The model is embedded with sensorial information and can now begin generating ’conditioned’ models
for different situations, analyzing and mapping the 3D model, and exploiting its thresholds and boundaries.
The ’conditioned’ model can be augmented back on the physical site, seeing the relationship and
unlocking the potential spatial opportunities. Various fabrication techniques can be used to build said
physical models.
Students are expected to upload a progress model/image/screenshot/text every day to our visual archive as
a means of capturing the amount of work that has been done.
3
(a) archive detail 1 (b) archive detail 2 (c) archive detail 3
Figure 1: realtime online research archive, Deniz Güvendi and Joris Putteneers | 2023
1.4 Software / Skills
A combination of:
• Various programming languages for programming a microcontroller (ESP32), a database, a backend
framework, and our machine learning model trained on our in-house dataset.
• SideFX Houdini for visualizing the generated data, generating synthetic data and training of our machine
learning model.
• Git & GitHub for version control.
• Adobe Photoshop & Illustrator
• Blender & Rhinoceros for modelling.
• Gaussian Splatting.
• Various tools of fabrication. (This will vary on the proposal)
All techniques will have detailed documentation, students are not required to have prior knowledge
of the above-mentioned tools.